



Network Working Group                                         D. Hardman
Internet-Draft                                            Provenant, Inc
Intended status: Standards Track                         8 November 2024
Expires: 12 May 2025


                       Verifiable Voice Protocol
             draft-hardman-verifiable-voice-protocol-latest

Abstract

   Verifiable Voice Protocol (VVP) proves the identity and authorization
   of parties who are accountable for telephone calls, eliminating trust
   gaps that scammers exploit.  VVP aims at roughly the same target as
   STIR/SHAKEN+RCD and related technologies.  Like these approaches, it
   binds strong cryptographic evidence to the message that initiates a
   phone call, and allows this evidence to be verified downstream.
   However, VVP builds from different technical and governance
   assumptions.  This foundation makes VVP simpler, more decentralized
   and cross-jurisdictional, cheaper to deploy and maintain, more
   private, more scalable, and higher assurance than alternatives.  It
   can be used by itself, or as an inexpensive supplement to bridge gaps
   in existing approaches.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://dhh1128.github.io/verifiable-voice-protocol/draft-hardman-
   verifiable-voice-protocol.html.  Status information for this document
   may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hardman-
   verifiable-voice-protocol/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/dhh1128/verifiable-voice-protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 May 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Overview
     3.1.  Roles
     3.2.  Evidence
     3.3.  Curation
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   When we get phone calls, we want to know who's calling, and why.  If
   we could answer such questions with confidence, we would make
   reasonable judgments about whether to answer, based on the
   relationship and reputation context.

   Unfortunately, providing quality answers is much harder than it
   seems.  Scammers love to impersonate, and they succeed more often
   than we'd like.

   Regulators are mandating increased transparency to address this risk.
   This is wise, and it can be effective.  However, it introduces some
   heavy burdens.  Reliably vetting the identity of every possible
   caller is an ambitious task.  Maintaining a comprehensive, up-to-date
   graph of certificates and cryptophic keys to attest vetted identities
   is harder.  Operating a central registry of such identities and
   evidence, especially as phone calls increasingly cross jurisdictional
   boundaries, is harder still.  Regulatory constraints on data
   movement, shifting technical standards, variety in PSTNs and system
   interconnects, and many other factors further complexify.

   However, the inherent limit in today's transparency efforts is more
   fundamental: there exists a pernicious a gap between the party
   accountable for a phone call, and the party who answers the "who's
   calling?" question.  A decade ago, the TSP told us who's calling in a
   probabilistic way, based on unreliable metadata about a call's
   source.  More recently, approaches like STIR/SHAKEN move the answer
   closer to the origin, and add tamper protections.  However, there is
   still a gap: the signer of a SHAKEN passport is the OSP, not the
   caller, and the OSP may not know what's happening in this gap.

   In theory, the remaining gap could be eliminated by requiring a
   perfect authentication and authorization between callers and OSPs,
   for every phone call.  However, this is impractical for many
   legitimate business reasons.  To cite one obvious example,
   Organization X might hire Call Center Y to call on their behalf,
   using X's reputation/brand and X's phone number.  In such a
   situation, X is the relevant answer to the "who's calling" question,
   but Y is the originator of the call -- and there's no good way to
   guarantee that everyone knows the existence and status of that
   relationship.  In addition, the market manifests a demand for
   wholesalers/aggregators of phone numbers, and is characterized by
   complex system layers and interconnects, that further challenge
   transparency.

   VVP solves these problems by applying two crucial innovations:

   *  It uses an evidence format called an ACDC (Authentic Chained Data
      Containers).  The chaining feature in ACDCs is far more powerful,
      far safer, and far easier to maintain than certificates.  It is
      also capable of modeling delegated relationships such as the one
      between Organization X and Call Center Y.  This eliminates the gap
      between accountable party and caller, while maintaining perfect
      transparency.  Y can sign a call on behalf of X, using a number
      allocated to X, and using X's brand, without impersonating X, and
      they can prove to any OSP or any other party, in any jurisdiction,
      that they have the right to do so.  The evidence that Y cites can
      be easily built and maintained by X and Y and does not need to be
      published in a central registry.  Further, when evidence about X
      and Y is filtered through suballocations or crosses jurisdictional
      boundaries, it can be reused, or linked and transformed, without
      altering its robustness or efficiency.  ACDCs are lossless with
      respect to identity relationships, whereas formats like W3C
      Verifiable Credentials and SD-JWTs are lossy; this means ACDCs can
      be used to generate derivative forms of evidence for subsets of an
      ecosystem that prefer to consume evidence differnetly.  The result
      is that no third party has to guess who's accountable; the
      accountable party is transparently and provably accountable,
      period.  Notwithstanding this transparency, ACDCs support a form
      of pseudonymity and graduated disclosure that satisfies vital
      privacy and data processing constraints.

   *  Although VVP can work inside the governance frameworks such as
      SHAKEN, it dramatically upgrades at least one key ingredient: the
      foundational vetting mechanism.  The ACDC format used by VVP is
      also the format used by the Verifiable Legal Entity Identifier
      (vLEI) standardized in ISO 17442. vLEIs use a KYC approach
      established by the Regulatory Oversight Committee of the G20,
      based on the LEI that's globally required in cross-border banking.
      This means the basis of vLEI trust is already adopted, and it is
      not limited to any particular jurisdiction or to telecom.  VVP
      offers two-way, easy bridges between identity in phone calls and
      identity in financial, legal, technical, logistics, regulatory,
      web, email, and social media contexts.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Overview

3.1.  Roles

   For a given phone call, the Terminating Party (TP) is the party that
   receives the call.  The direct service provider of the TP is the
   Terminating Service Provider (TSP).

   The Originating Party (OP) is the caller.  The direct service
   provider of the OP is commonly called the Originating Service
   Provider (OSP).  For a given phone call, there may be many layers,
   boundaries, and transitions between OSP and TSP.

   Accountable Parties (AP) are organizations or individuals who hold
   the right to use (RTU) in the eyes of a regulator.  APs can be OPs,
   but this relationship does not always hold.  A business can hire a
   call center, and delegate to the call center the right to use its
   phone number.  In such a case, the business is the AP, but the call
   center is the OP.

   Checkers (CH) are parties that want to know who's calling, and why,
   and that evaluate the answers to these questions by examining formal
   evidence.  TPs, TSPs, OSPs, government regulators, law enforcement
   doing lawful intercept, auditors, and even APs or OPs can be
   checkers.  Each may need to see different views of the evidence about
   a particular phone call, and it may be impossible to comply with
   various regulations unless these views are kept distinct -- yet each
   wants similar and compatible assurance.

3.2.  Evidence

   A digital signature over arbitrary data D constitutes evidence that
   the signer processed D.  The proof can be verified by checking that
   the signature is associated with the public key of the signer.
   Assuming that the signer has not lost unique control of the
   corresponding private key, and that cryptography is appropriately
   strong, we are justified in the belief that the signer acted to
   process the data.

   VVP uses digital signatures as one form of evidence.

   Most other evidence in VVP uses the ACDC format.  This is a
   normalized, serialized form of data that contains references to
   signatures anchored elsewhere.  See the ACDC spec.

   Some formal definitions will help to characterize ACDC-based
   evidence.

   Cryptographically verifiable data (CVD) is data that's associated
   with a digital signature and a claim about who signed it.

   When CVD is an assertion, we make the additional assumption that the
   signer intends whatever the data asserts, since they took an
   affirmative action to create non-repudiable evidence that they
   processed it.

   A Credential is a special kind of CVD that asserts the entitlement of
   its bearer -- _and only its bearer_ -- to a privilege.  CVD that says
   Organization X exists with a particular ID number in government
   registers, and with a particular legal name, is not necessarily a
   credential.  In order to be a credential, it would have to include an
   assertion that its bearer -- _and only its bearer_ -- is entitled to
   use the identity of Organization X.  If signed data merely enumerates
   properties without conferring privileges on a specific party, it is
   just CVD.

   A Bearer Token is a Credential that satisfies the binding
   requirements by trivial possession -- like a movie ticket, the first
   party that presents the artifact to a verifier gets the privilege.
   Since Bearer Credentials can be stolen, this is risky.  Although they
   can be protected by secure channels and expiration dates, JWTs,
   session cookies, and other artifacts in mainstream identity
   technology are typically bearer tokens.

   A Targeted Credential is CVD that identifies an Issuee as the bearer,
   and that requires the Issuee to prove their identity
   cryptographically (e.g., to produce a proper digital signature) in
   order to claim the associated privilege.

   A Justifying Link (JL) is a reference, inside of one CVD, to another
   CVD that justifies what the first CVD is asserting.

   With this background, we can now say that VVP depends on the
   following types of evidence:

   *  A Vetting Credential.  This is a targeted credential that
      enumerates the formal and legal attributes of a unique legal
      entity.  It MUST include a legal identifier that makes the entity
      unique in its home jurisdiction, and it MUST include a
      cryptographic identifier that is unique globally.  It is called a
      vetting credential because it MUST be issued according to a
      documented vetting process that offers formal assurance that is is
      only issued with accurate information, and only to the AP it
      describes.  A vetting credential confers the privilege of acting
      with the associated legal identity if and only if the bearer can
      prove their identity as issuee via a digital signature.  A vetting
      credential MUST include a JL to a credential that qualifies the
      issuer as a party trusted to do vetting.  This linked credential
      that qualifies the issuer of the vetting credential MAY contain a
      JL that qualifies its own issuer, and such JLs MAY be repeated
      through as many layers as desired.  In VVP, the reference type of
      a Vetting Credential is a vLEI.  This implies both a schema and a
      governance framework.  Other Vetting Credential types are
      possible, but they MUST be true credentials that meet the
      normative requirements here.  They MUST NOT be bearer tokens.

   *  A Brand Credential.  This is a targeted credential that enumerates
      brand properties such as a brand name and a logo.  It MUST be
      issued to an AP as a legal entity, but it does not enumerate the
      formal and legal attributes of the AP; rather, it enumerates
      properties that would be meaningful to a TP who's deciding whether
      to take a phone call.  It confers on its issue the right to use
      the described brand.  This credential MUST be issued according to
      a documented brand research process that offers formal assurance
      that it is only issued with accurate information, and only to an
      AP that has the right to use the described brand.  A single AP MAY
      have multiple brand credentials (e.g., Coca Cola Holdings Germany,
      Gmbh holds a brand credential for Coke and for Sprite), and rights
      to use the same brand MAY be conferred to on multiple APs (Coca
      Cola Holdings Germany, Gmbh and Coca Cola Canada, Ltd may both
      possess brand credentials for Sprite).  A brand credential MUST
      contain a JL to a vetting credential, that shows that the right to
      use the brand was evaluated only after using a vetting credential
      to prove the identity of the issuee.

   *  A TNAlloc Credential.  This is a targeted credential that confers
      on its issuee the right to use one or more telephone numbers.  If
      the issuer is not a regulator, it MUST contain a JL to an TNAlloc
      credential that justifies the issuer's right to pass a right to
      use downstream.

   Some Not all CVD The signer of a Credential is called an Issuer.

   A Bearer Credential confers entitlement through simple possession.

   VVP is built from three interrelated activities:

   *  Curating evidence

   *  Citing evidence

   *  Checking evidence

   Each Accountable Party (AP) that wants to associate its reputation
   with phone calls MUST maintain evidence, and they MUST cite evidence.
   Some maintainence MUST occur before the first time evidence is cited;
   thereafter, these two activities can overlap one another.  Citing
   evidence is what allows

3.3.  Curation

4.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Daniel Hardman
   Provenant, Inc
   Email: daniel.hardman@gmail.com
